CASSSIDECAR-339: Add developer-facing docs on testing Sidecar (#255)
apache/cassandra-sidecar: TESTING.md

# regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
# to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
# "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
# with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.
#
-->

# Testing Guide for Apache Cassandra Sidecar

This document provides a comprehensive guide to running tests for the Apache Cassandra Sidecar project.

## Table of Contents

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Test Types](#test-types)
- [Running Tests](#running-tests)
- [Test Configuration](#test-configuration)
- [Development Testing](#development-testing)
- [Continuous Integration](#continuous-integration)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Prerequisites

### Required Software

1. **Java 11 or higher** (OpenJDK or Oracle)

> 2. **Docker** for running integration tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Docker** for running integration tests that leverage the S3MockContainer to test the S3 client. Unless your test requires the S3 Mock Container, please create a unit or integration test. 
```

and don't require external dependencies.

**Location**: `src/test/java/` in each module

**Running unit tests**:
```bash
# Run all unit tests
./gradlew test

# Run unit tests for a specific module
./gradlew :client:test
./gradlew :server:test
```

### Integration Tests

Integration tests verify component interactions and require running
Cassandra instances. They are divided into two categories:

#### Lightweight Integration Tests
- Basic functionality tests
- Faster execution
- **Tag**: None (default)

#### Heavyweight Integration Tests  
- Complex scenarios
- Multi-node cluster tests
- Longer execution times
- **Tag**: `@Tag("heavy")`

**Location**: `src/integrationTest/` in test modules

**Running integration tests**:
```bash
# Run all integration tests
./gradlew integrationTest

# Run only lightweight integration tests
./gradlew integrationTestLightWeight

# Run only heavyweight integration tests
./gradlew integrationTestHeavyWeight

# Run integration tests for specific module
./gradlew :integration-tests:integrationTest

# Run integration tests for specific module
./gradlew :server:integrationTest
```

### Container Tests

> Container-based tests run in Docker environments for additional isolation.

Reviewer: We should probably describe the cases where we use container tests (just the SBW-on-S3 code where we need the S3 mock, right?) so folks don't unintentionally add tests where they aren't needed.

**Location**: `src/containerTest/` in relevant modules

### Test Fixtures

Test fixtures provide shared test utilities and data across modules.

**Location**: `src/testFixtures/` in modules with `java-test-fixtures` plugin

## Running Tests

### Quick Test Commands

```bash
# Run all tests (unit + integration)
./gradlew check

# Run only unit tests
./gradlew test

# Run only integration tests
./gradlew integrationTest

# Skip integration tests
./gradlew check -x integrationTest

# Run with specific Cassandra versions
./gradlew test -Dcassandra.sidecar.versions_to_test=4.1,5.1
```

### Test Execution Configuration

Integration tests support several environment variables:

> | Variable | Default | Description |

Reviewer: NIT: Reformat table so it's readable in text and not just rendered.

|----------|---------|-------------|

> | `INTEGRATION_MAX_HEAP_SIZE` | `3000M` | Maximum heap size for integration tests |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `INTEGRATION_MAX_HEAP_SIZE` | `3000M` | Maximum heap size for integration tests, per parallel fork |
```

# distributed with this work for additional information
# regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
# to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
# "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
# with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.
#
-->

# Testing Guide for Apache Cassandra Sidecar

This document provides a comprehensive guide to running tests for the Apache Cassandra Sidecar project.

## Table of Contents

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Test Types](#test-types)
- [Running Tests](#running-tests)
- [Test Configuration](#test-configuration)
- [Development Testing](#development-testing)
- [Continuous Integration](#continuous-integration)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Prerequisites

### Required Software

> 1. **Java 11 or higher** (OpenJDK or Oracle)

Reviewer: Do we need to call out OpenJDK or Oracle? Is this just to try to limit our "support" to those, and avoid other JDKs? Because I don't think _we_ test with Oracle JDK anywhere, right?

Author: Good point, I will remove that reference

2. **Docker** for running integration tests that leverage the S3MockContainer to test the S3 client. Unless your test requires the S3 Mock Container, please create a unit or integration test. 
3. **Git** for cloning repositories

### Build Prerequisites

Before running tests, you must build the required Cassandra dtest jars:

```bash
./scripts/build-dtest-jars.sh
```

This script builds dtest jars for the supported Cassandra versions.
You can customize which versions to build:

- **REPO**: Cassandra git repository (default: `https://github.com/apache/cassandra.git`)
- **BRANCHES**: Space-delimited list of branches (default: `"cassandra-4.0 cassandra-4.1 cassandra-5.0 trunk"`)

Example with custom branches:
```bash
BRANCHES="cassandra-4.1 trunk" ./scripts/build-dtest-jars.sh
```

> ### Network Setup for Multi-Node Tests

Reviewer: Do we also need to add entries to `/etc/hosts` for these to work correctly? I know I _did_ ages ago, and since it's persistent I never touched it again, but I think they are still necessary.

Cassandra instances. They are divided into two categories:

#### Lightweight Integration Tests
- Basic functionality tests
- Faster execution
- **Tag**: None (default)

#### Heavyweight Integration Tests  
- Complex scenarios
- Multi-node cluster tests
- Longer execution times
- **Tag**: `@Tag("heavy")`

**Location**: `src/integrationTest/` in test modules

**Running integration tests**:
```bash
# Run all integration tests
./gradlew integrationTest

# Run only lightweight integration tests
./gradlew integrationTestLightWeight

# Run only heavyweight integration tests
./gradlew integrationTestHeavyWeight

# Run integration tests for specific module
./gradlew :integration-tests:integrationTest

# Run integration tests for specific module
./gradlew :server:integrationTest
```

### Container Tests

Container-based tests run in Docker environments for additional isolation. For example,
tests for the Restore from S3 feature leverage the testcontainer-based S3 service
(`com.adobe.testing.s3mock.testcontainers.S3MockContainer`). Only tests that require
testcontainer-like functionality should live under `src/containerTest/`; otherwise,

> a unit or in JVM dtest integration test should suffice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a unit or in JVM dtest integration test is preferred.
```

**Location**: `src/containerTest/` in relevant modules

### Test Fixtures

Test fixtures provide shared test utilities and data across modules.

**Location**: `src/testFixtures/` in modules with `java-test-fixtures` plugin

## Running Tests

### Quick Test Commands

```bash
# Run all tests (unit + integration)
./gradlew check

# Run only unit tests
./gradlew test

# Run only integration tests
./gradlew integrationTest

> # Skip integration tests

Reviewer: Can you clarify the difference between this and `./gradlew test` - does it also run the container tests? Also, can you skip those with something like `-x containerTest` ?

Author: This is documented below under `Quick Test Commands`. But I will mention how to skip container tests

| `INTEGRATION_MTLS_ENABLED`       | `true`  | Enable mTLS for integration tests                          |

Example:
```bash
INTEGRATION_MAX_HEAP_SIZE=4000M INTEGRATION_MAX_PARALLEL_FORKS=2 ./gradlew integrationTest
```

### Gradle Properties

You can also skip integration tests using Gradle properties:

```bash
# Via command line
./gradlew check -x integrationTest

# Via environment variable
export skipIntegrationTest=true
./gradlew check
```

## Test Configuration

### Cassandra Version Testing

The test framework supports multiple Cassandra versions simultaneously. Configure versions via:

**System Property**:
```bash
-Dcassandra.sidecar.versions_to_test=4.0,4.1,5.1
```

**Default versions**: `4.1,5.1` (as defined in `TestVersionSupplier.java`)

### Test Logging

Integration tests use a dedicated logback configuration:
- **File**: `server/src/test/resources/logback-in-jvm-dtest.xml`
- **Level**: Configurable per test class

### JVM Options

Tests running on Java 11+ automatically receive optimized JVM arguments defined in `gradle/common/java11Options.gradle`.

## Development Testing

### Running Tests During Development

For faster development cycles:

```bash

> # Run with code checks disabled

Reviewer: Run _what_ with checks disabled?
```suggestion
# Run the Sidecar server with code checks disabled. This is useful for local manual testing of endpoints.
```

### Code Coverage

Jacoco coverage reports are automatically generated after tests:

```bash
# Generate coverage report
./gradlew jacocoTestReport

# View coverage report
open build/reports/jacoco/test/html/index.html
```

## Continuous Integration

### CircleCI Integration

The project uses CircleCI for automated testing. To set up CircleCI on your fork:

1. Use CircleCI's "Add Projects" function
2. Choose manual configuration (don't replace the existing config)
3. CircleCI will automatically use the in-project configuration

### Code Quality Checks

Before tests run, the following quality checks execute:
- **Checkstyle**: Code style verification
- **SpotBugs**: Static analysis for bugs
- **RAT**: License header verification

```bash
# Run code quality checks only
./gradlew codeCheckTasks

# Skip code quality checks
./gradlew test -x codeCheckTasks
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### "DTest jar not found"
**Solution**: Run `./scripts/build-dtest-jars.sh` to build required dependencies.

#### "Network interface not available"
**Solution**: Set up network aliases as described in [Network Setup](#network-setup-for-multi-node-tests).

> #### "OutOfMemoryError during integration tests"

Reviewer: We really shouldn't need this any more given we fork every test - should the guidance really be to figure out if there's a leak somewhere?

Author: I guess it depends on how many instances of cassandra are spun up for the test. But I agree that defaults should be sufficient for all our tests

**Solution**: Increase heap size:
```bash
INTEGRATION_MAX_HEAP_SIZE=4000M ./gradlew integrationTest
```

#### "Tests are hanging or slow"
**Solution**: Reduce parallel forks:
```bash
INTEGRATION_MAX_PARALLEL_FORKS=1 ./gradlew integrationTest
```

### Test Isolation Issues

Integration tests use `forkEvery = 1` to ensure test isolation. If you encounter test pollution:

1. Verify each test properly cleans up resources
2. Check for static state leakage

> 3. Review test execution order

Reviewer: with `forkEvery = 1` there should be no possibility of static state leakage _between_ test classes. Maybe we need a bit more of a description here so people better understand when this might happen?
```suggestion
Integration tests use `forkEvery = 1` to ensure test isolation. If you encounter test pollution:

1. Verify each test properly cleans up resources
2. Check for static state leakage within the failing test class.
3. Review test execution order.

If the test state pollution is unavoidable within the test class, it is reasonable to split the tests into multiple, independent test classes.
```

> ### Debugging Integration Tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Enabling debug logging for Integration Tests
```

Enable debug logging by modifying `server/src/test/resources/logback-in-jvm-dtest.xml`:

```xml
<logger name="org.apache.cassandra.sidecar" level="DEBUG"/>
```

> ### Performance Testing

Reviewer: This isn't really "performance testing" in the traditional sense of the word... I'm not sure what it is, other than "Troubleshooting long-running tests,"

For performance-sensitive tests:

1. Use `@Tag("heavy")` to categorize expensive tests
2. Monitor test execution times (logged automatically for tests ≥ 60 seconds)
3. Consider test parallelization settings

### Environment-Specific Issues

#### Docker Issues
- Ensure Docker daemon is running
- Verify Docker has sufficient resources allocated
- Check for port conflicts

#### Java Version Issues
- Verify Java 11+ compatibility

> - Check JVM arguments in CI environments

Reviewer: Should we include a link to the `java11options.gradle` file to make sure they know _what_ they should be looking at?

> - Review module path configurations

Reviewer: Not sure what this is supposed to mean - can we be more descriptive of what "Review module path configurations" means in the context of "environment-specific issues" - are you talking about Classpath issues?

Author: not sure actually, I will remove it
